---
title: Graphics and System Readings
lang: en-US
date: 2021-03-07
---

Blogs and news read during March 2021 that I found interesting.
<!-- more -->

Disclaimer: Opinions on my own and please judge the credibility by yourself.

[[toc]]

### Proton Has Enabled 7000 Windows Games To Run On Linux
[https://boilingsteam.com/7000-windows-games-working-on-linux-with-proton/](https://boilingsteam.com/7000-windows-games-working-on-linux-with-proton/)  - March 05, 2021

>  for every Windows game out there, there’s a coin flip chance that it will work just as well on Linux ... Note that when a game does not run well with vanilla Proton, there’s always a non-negligible chance that Proton GE may fare better at running it.

### LLVM meets Code Property Graphs 
[https://blog.llvm.org/posts/2021-02-23-llvm-meets-code-property-graphs/](https://blog.llvm.org/posts/2021-02-23-llvm-meets-code-property-graphs/)

> The code property graph (CPG) is a data structure designed to mine large codebases for instances of programming patterns via a domain-specific query language ... The core idea of the CPG is that different classic program representations are merged into a property graph, a single data structure that holds information about the program’s syntax, control- and intra-procedural data-flow ... 

> One of the primary interfaces to the code property graphs is a tool called Joern ... This article presents ShiftLeft‘s open-source implementation of llvm2cpg - a standalone tool that brings LLVM Bitcode support to Joern. 

> Joern comes with a data-flow tracker enabling more sophisticated queries, such as “is there a user controlled malloc in the program?”

The data flow tracker that is able to check dynamic allocation in the program seems very interesting. 

### New Vulkan Extensions For Mobile: Maintenance Extensions
[https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-maintenance-extensions](https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-maintenance-extensions)

- VK_KHR_uniform_buffer_standard_layout: Some history of std140 and std430 UBO layout and how they are different in alignment. This extension brings std430 UBO layout to Vulkan.
- VK_KHR_separate_depth_stencil_layouts: Depth and stencil are commonly being packed together. It leads to inconvenience in scenarios where depth buffer and stencil buffer are used in different pipeline stages. This extension supports an explicit decoupling of depth and stencil buffer.
- VK_KHR_imageless_framebuffer: Extension supports creating VkFramebuffer without specifying attachments, delaying attachment binding to command recording time. It saves applications from keeping a mapping between framebuffers and attachments. In my understanding, now framebuffer and renderpass can be one-one mapped in most cases.

### New Game Changing Vulkan Extensions For Mobile: Buffer Device Address
[https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-buffer-device-address](https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-buffer-device-address)

> ... none of the competing graphics APIs support.
Extensions that support getting the GPU virtual address of a buffer. With the extension, it is possible for a shader to read/write a buffer without binding its descriptors. Though not sure if there is any practical case to do it that way.  Maybe some debugging tools can utilize it?
The extension also comes with a feature called `bufferDeviceAddressCaptureReplay`. Looks like using the extension could break capture replay tools. Not intuitive to me how it breaks, is that because applications may have different code paths for different returned virtual addresses?

### New Game Changing Vulkan Extensions For Mobile: Descriptor Indexing
[https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-descriptor-indexing](https://community.arm.com/developer/tools-software/graphics/b/blog/posts/vulkan-descriptor-indexing)

VK_EXT_descriptor_indexing brings update-after-bin support for descriptors. In my understanding, it is similar to the concept of a dynamic uniform buffer that you create a big chunk of memory but only use portions of it in each draw call.  However, this extension does it to the descriptors of the uniform buffer, not the uniform buffer itself.

### Moving The Machinery to Bindless
[https://ourmachinery.com/post/moving-the-machinery-to-bindless/](https://ourmachinery.com/post/moving-the-machinery-to-bindless/)

Using VK_EXT_descriptor_indexing in practice. It creates a maxminal number of descriptor set bindings beforehand and then allocate and free descriptors dynamically in each command draw.
It uses a linked list to track the free slots of descriptors in the big descriptor set bindings.
